Hello. Thanks, everyone, for coming. So Ryan wanted you to imagine that you were babies.
I would like you to imagine that you are students in my Intro, Stats, and Data Science class.
So we're about four weeks into the semester. This means you've learned how to wrangle and
summarize data using dplyr. You can make beautiful visualizations with ggplot2.
And now I'm going to give you a new-to-you dataset on trees in Portland's parks.
I'm going to ask you a more open-ended question than I have so far. I'm going to ask you to just
do some exploratory data analysis on these trees. And what I want you to just ponder for a moment
as my student four weeks into the semester, whether or not you feel ready to explore these data.
And when I say a moment, I really do mean just a moment, because I'm now going to show you a
couple of the typical responses I've gotten from students when I did just this. All right.
So one of my students decided to take two quantitative variables and make a scatter plot.
That's the appropriate graph. And they went a step further. They realized there were lots of
points, so they tried to deal with the overplotting by making the points transparent.
They know I love colors, so they customized the color with a hex code. And so their graph really
looks pretty good. But then we get to their explanation. And we see that it says, here's
a graph of the dbh and the crown with ew. We can see that as the dbh increases, so does the crown
with w. All right. So this is not as bad as just saying, as x increases, so does y. They use the
variable names. But I don't really get a sense of these trees. I don't feel like we learned anything
about the trees from their interpretation of their graph. Another student decided to look at species
and to see what types of trees there are in Portland. And honestly, I was pretty impressed
with their data wrangling skills, right? They found that there were lots of different species.
So after they counted them up, they subsetted down to just the five most common. And then they even
sorted their bar graph based on frequency. Wonderful. Used a lovely color again. But again,
their interpretation of their graph, they noticed we have a lot of these PSME trees. I'm not a
botanist. I don't think the student here was either. We don't have a great sense of trees in
Portland. All right. But you know what? This is not my students' fault. They've done what I've taught
them to do. I have taught them to wrangle code. I've taught them to make graphs. And I gave them
a one-sentence explanation of this data. So maybe it's obvious to all of you. It should have been
obvious maybe to me. But to do good data work, we need context. And I was not providing my students
with enough context to go to the last step and to actually tell stories with their data.
But you know what? Providing good context is tough and sounds exhausting. If you've ever taught an
intro stats and data science course, I already have jammed enough things into that class, right?
I have to teach them all of the statistical concepts. I have to teach them how to code. And
now I also have to teach them about the data. So I'm going to admit to you that I mostly ignored
this problem. Sure, instead of a sentence, I started giving them a paragraph about the data.
And I would link out to where I got the data from. But I'm going to tell you right now that
their interpretations of their summary statistics and their graphs didn't really improve very much.
Until I had to co-lead a workshop on teaching intro stats with R. So this was two instructors
who most of them had been teaching intro stats for quite a while. But they were new to R.
They were new to coding. It was a half-day workshop. And you know what I didn't want to
have to do in this half-day workshop? I did not want to teach these people file paths.
I did not want to spend an hour of the workshop just loading the data in. I needed to teach them
how to wrangle and summarize and model and visualize data, right? And so my co-instructor
said, hey, Kelly, you have that really cool data set on trees in Portland. How about you turn that
into an R data package? Because you got this train ride coming up, you can just do it on the train.
All right. So my first R data package was created called pdxtrees. I have a public GitHub repository
where the participants in my workshop, but also all of you, can learn about the package.
Being a good data scientist, I made a hex sticker. If you're like, hmm, what in the world is going
on with that hex sticker and those colors? Well, if you've never been to Portland's airport,
it is fashioned after the PDX airport carpet. Now I'm all worried that you're going to go to
Portland's airport and you're going to be like, that's not the carpet. It is true. They ripped up
our beloved carpet. I think there's like one terminal that still has it. But this is my
favorite Portland carpet. Okay. So my first R data package was born, and this solved our problem.
They could install the package, and then they all had the same code to load the data set. I didn't
have to teach them about file paths. And we could go through the workshop then, and they could learn
to wrangle and visualize and model and summarize the data. Okay. But there was a really lovely
side effect of creating an R data package. As I told you, I made a readme. So I shared that URL,
which had the readme as the landing page where they could learn more about the data set. And then
as they were using the data set, if they had a question about a particular variable, they could
just do question mark and the function name, and they could learn about that variable. Very simply.
Okay. So now that I had this R data package that I used, sure, originally for a workshop,
I now use it in my classes. And I have to say that the students' interpretations of their work
has improved massively. So the student that now decides to make a scatter plot, again, of these
two variables, tells me a lovely story about the trees. As the diameter of the tree increases,
well, it makes sense that the canopy is going to get larger. We're going to have more branches
and leaves and foliage. We don't have to be a botanist for that to make sense. We can now start
to actually see the trees. And that most common tree? Well, that's Douglas fir. Douglas fir is
Oregon state tree. It makes sense that it was the most common tree in our data set.
All right. So context is key to doing good data work. And what I learned is because the context
is so close to the data in an R data package, that is a great way to give people access to
the context, the story of the data. And then I went a step further, not with my intro students,
with my second semester students. I decided once I'm now teaching students about data management
and data sharing, I should be teaching them to share their data with R data packages. And I will
say their favorite part of the project is creating their hex sticker. So here are just a selection of
hex stickers from my students over the years. Okay. Let's talk about how to make an R data package.
First, all right, this seems obvious, but you need to have a data set that you want to share with
others. So I'm going to just admit to you all, I had not bought a new pair of jeans since before
the pandemic. I was really dreading it. And so I was a good data scientist, and I went on
Anthropology's website and did what any data scientist would do, and I created a data set
of jeans. Spoiler alert, people really like wide leg jeans nowadays. Okay. That's a thing.
Leg opening. All right. So now I want to share this jean data set with others so that when they
want to go shopping for jeans, it's not as painful. All right. So let's put this data in an R data
package. I'm going to admit something right now. I am not about to go through all of the steps to
make an R data package because you should not learn how to make an R data package by passively
sitting there and watching me talk through the steps. Instead, you should learn from the pros.
But even still, you should not sit here and listen to Jenny and Hadley tell you the steps to make an
R data package. What you should do is you should go get their book, which you can read for free
online, and they actually go through the steps. So you should actively go through the steps of
creating a package. Now, their book is about making R packages in general, but they have
sections specifically about how to put data into your package. So instead, what I want to focus on
are some of the tips and the documentation. So in terms of tips, I recommend that you lean heavily
on the wonderful helper functions that are out there. Dev tools use this. R oxygen 2. I just
don't understand. I'm from Iowa. I'm going to pronounce things however I want. But these helper
packages are really useful. They streamline the process. They automate a lot of the steps.
They just make it easier to go from raw data to finished package. The other tip I have for you is
that there are lots of wonderful R data packages out there. So mimic them. In particular, the
Palmer Penguins package has wonderful documentation inside. And so I always have my students, when
they're working on this project, go look at some of these packages, go to their GitHub repositories,
and see how they're actually talking about the data. Okay. But as I said, what I want to focus
on in terms of the package development is creating good documentation. Because that is really the
piece that is so wonderful about an R data package. I'm going to talk about three different types of
documentation. And I'll show just a little bit of code that you can use to help with that process.
So let's start with the readme. You've already seen the readme for my pdxtrees R data package.
We need to now make a readme for the genes package. To get the skeleton of a readme,
you can use the use readme RMD function. And so the way I want us to think about the readme is,
all right. I'm on anthropology's website. I've got a sea of genes in front of me. And I see one
I think I might be interested in. So there's that nice little button, the quick view button,
which will pull up just a small page that tries to give me the essential information I need to
decide whether or not I want to look at that gene more or less. Or if I want to move on to some other
pair. So I want you to think about the readme as the quick view. You're trying to help the user
decide very quickly whether or not they should be interested in your package. So you want to give
them a big picture overview of what the package does, how they can install it, and maybe a simple
example of how they could use your package. Okay? So we have that for our genes. Someone decides,
all right, yes, I am interested in this package. I'm going to install it. I'm going to load it.
So now we should move on to the help file. So the help file is our next layer in to help them get a
better sense of this package and the data inside. The use R function is useful for creating the
shell of where you're going to put the contents of your help file. You'll put in some R oxygen
code. And then you'll run the document function to turn that into the help files we're used to.
So that when someone does question mark genes, they'll see the help file for this data set.
And the way I like to think about the help file is this is like when I now clicked on that genes
actual page, I get the product details, right? I get to learn about what it's made out of. Was it
made in the U.S.? What's the style? So on and so forth. That's the same idea as the help file,
right? I get to learn about each of the individual variables. What's the class of those
variables? What's the values it can take on? How many genes are in my data set? So I get a sense
of how I could use this. What are the variables present? Why would I want to interact with this
data set? So now I've decided I want to interact with it. I have a better sense of it. But I would
like to see some examples. Now, you can put examples in your help file. But maybe I want
to have more fully fleshed out examples. So vignettes were brought up at the end of the last
talk. So vignettes are going to be the last type of documentation that I'll mention. And the way
so the use vignette will again make the shell of a vignette for you that you can fill in.
And the way I want us to think about the vignette is on anthropology's page, underneath that project
details, they have this lovely ways to wear section where they'll show the jeans with different
shirts and shoes and accessories. Yes, they're just trying to get you to buy more on their website.
But it's giving you concrete ideas on how you could wear those jeans. That's the same purpose
our vignette should be serving. It should give the user concrete ideas on how they could use
our dataset. How they could wrangle or visualize or model this dataset.
Okay. So I just have a few final thoughts I want to share with all of you around R data packages.
So I did tell Nick this. But I'm also going to tell all of you, it took me longer than a three-hour
train ride to create my first R data package. There are just errors you're going to run into
that you have not seen before. And the Wi-Fi on Amtrak is terrible. So that's true.
But after I made my first package, making the second and so on went much, much faster.
And much more smoothly. And so my biggest piece of advice, if you're going to make an R data
package is make it with someone else who's already made one before. Because once you hit some weird
snag, they can come in, look over your shoulder and tell you what you're missing. So this is
really important to me in terms of teaching my students how to make these. So the first day of
class or the first day of the project, we actually during the class period all make the same package
from start to finish using the whole game chapter of Hadley and Jenny's book. So that again, I'm
around when they, you know, on step four forget to put quotes in the name of the package at the
end of their script file. I can find these mistakes and help them see that really they have the skills
and the tool set to make a package. But again, I think it's really important to have someone around
who can help you troubleshoot errors. And then I want to talk about that lonely CSV for a moment.
You're going to still share data as lonely CSVs. I absolutely still do that with my students. I
don't just give them data from R data packages in part because after they leave my class,
people are not going to share data with them always with R data packages. So it's okay to
give people CSVs, but it is important that we are investing time in the context so that when we share
data with others, with our students, our collaborators, frankly ourselves, we actually
are giving people the information they need to do good data work because context really is key
to doing good data work. Okay. Thank you so much for coming. I do...
So as I said, I really did make that genes demo repo so you can check it out. I also have
hex stickers for my PDX trees package. If you'd like one, come see me after the session.
Okay. We have a few questions in a minute or two. Do you teach about data ownership and how
you navigate this as students create their own packages?
Yeah. So I mean, like have you ever thought about what license to have, right? So now
that'll be a question. You're going to get an error when you try to, or at least a warning.
One of those two, when you tried to build that package, if you've not put a license in there.
And so yes, this is a perfect moment. And I'm going to say, you know what I do when we're
going to talk about licenses and ownership? I bring a data librarian into the classroom
because they are much better at talking about that than I am. And so they talk about the
different types of licenses and what impact that would have downstream on people using the data
set in your package. Great question.
Can you talk about having students make their own, how it went for the students?
Yeah. So, you know, even if on day one, we do a demo where we go from start to finish
and me and the TAs are walking around the rooms and helping them, you're still going
to hit snags, right? So, so absolutely there are, there are going to be issues that you
hit along the way. So we would bake sometime into class where, again, they would get to
work on their, their packages in their groups and I'm walking around the room and helping
them. So I would say with enough scaffolding, it really can go okay, but you do really need
some experts around because you don't want them to then sit in their dorm room, you know,
for four hours with this one bug that in, you know, two seconds you would be able to
catch and now just decide like coding is terrible because I can't, I can't get my package to
compile. So, so yes, you just have to do a lot of scaffolding. My office hours during
the time when they're working on this package, I always have like muffins and cookies as
an extra incentive to really get them coming to see me. So, so yes, I think it's just
all about providing them with the right, right support. And we spend four class periods actually
learning about the different steps because talking about the documentation and helping
them write good documentation takes time. So, so you'd still want to also devote a,
a significant chunk of, of class to this.
All right, last question. Did any of them send their packages to CRAN?
Ah, so good question. And you'll notice one piece of documentation I did not talk about
was making a website with package down. So, right, I give the students ownership over
whether or not they do want to share things publicly or not. And so we talk about how
you can make a website, but I don't actually require that as part of the project. So at
the end of the project, they all get to decide whether or not as a group, they want to turn
their GitHub repo to be now public instead of private. But I'm not sure any of them have
submitted to CRAN yet. So that should be an extra credit point for, for the next iteration.
They should get free tuition for that.
Above my pay grade.
Let's thank Kelly again.